+++
draft=true
date = 2020-03-27T16:54:30Z
title = "$FILE"
weight = 1585328070
+++

 

ᏧᏟ ᏩᎦᏂ, ᏣᎳᎩ-ᏲᏁᎦ, ᏗᎪᏪᎵ ᏌᏊ  
Foxy Fagan, Cherokee-English, Book One

Copyright 2016, Michael Joyner

ISBN: 978-1-329-90130-8

Translator: Lawrence Panther

Artwork cleanup and lettering: Michael Joyner

This work is licensed under the
<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Creative Commons
Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 United States License</span>.

$Date: 2016/04/05 01:57:44 $ UTC

$Revision: 1.15 $



# ᎦᏁᎳ ᏍᏆᎩ ᏔᎩ

![image](pages.jpg/002)

# ᏧᏟ ᏩᎦᏂ

![image](pages.jpg/003)

![image](pages.jpg/004)

![image](pages.jpg/005)

![image](pages.jpg/006)

![image](pages.jpg/007)

![image](pages.jpg/008)

![image](pages.jpg/009)

![image](pages.jpg/010)

![image](pages.jpg/011)

![image](pages.jpg/012)

![image](pages.jpg/013)

![image](pages.jpg/014)

# ᎤᏍᏗ ᎦᎵᎩᎾ

![image](pages.jpg/015)

![image](pages.jpg/016)

![image](pages.jpg/017)

![image](pages.jpg/018)

![image](pages.jpg/019)

![image](pages.jpg/020)

![image](pages.jpg/021)

![image](pages.jpg/022)

![image](pages.jpg/023)

![image](pages.jpg/024)

# ᏈᏘ ᎠᎴ ᏔᏫᏘ

![image](pages.jpg/025)

![image](pages.jpg/026)

![image](pages.jpg/027)

![image](pages.jpg/028)

![image](pages.jpg/029)

# ᏣᎳᎩ-ᏲᏁᎦ

The following English translations are only approximations of the
Cherokee language dialogue and may be completely different in meaning in
some cases.

## ᎦᏁᎳ ᏍᏆᎩ ᏔᎩ

ᎦᏁᎳ ᏍᏆᎩ ᏔᎩ - Mrs. Squawky Tawky

ᏃᏊᏍ ᏗᏥᏲᏟ, ᏛᏨᏃᏎᎵ ᏥᏔᎦ ᏄᏛᏂᏗ ᎦᏅᏅᎢ ᏧᏂᏗᏫᏍᏗᎢ.

Now y’all children, I will explain for y’all what a chicken does before
crossing a roadway.

ᎠᎬᏱᎢ- ᎣᏍᏓ ᎭᎦᏎᏍᏓ ᎠᎦᏘᏌ ᏗᏜ… - First- Watch carefully towards the right …

ᏃᎴ ᎣᏍᏓ ᎭᎦᏎᏍᏓ ᎠᎦᏍᎦᎾ ᏗᏜ… - And then watch carefully towards the left …

Ꮓ ᏂᎦᏓ ᏕᏗᏂᏗᏫ ᎤᏟᏍᏓ\! - And then we all cross fast\!

ᏗᏥᏲᏟ\! ᎭᏢ ᎡᏤᏙᎭ? - Y’all children\! Where are y’all about?

ᎣᏂᏗᏜ ᎯᏙᎬᎢ, ᎡᏥ\! - Behind of where you are standing, mother\!

ᎦᏙ ᎡᏣᏛᎦ ᎢᏥᎷᎩ ᎠᎭᏂ? - What did y’all do to just arrive here?

Ꮎ ᎭᏫᏂᏗᏜ ᎦᎶᎯᏍᏙᏗ ᏦᏨᏂᏓ\! - That underneath way-point, our staying alive\!

ᎲᏂᏓ ᎭᏫᏂᏗᏜ ᎦᎶᎯᏍᏙᏗ ᏣᏓᎦᏎᏍᏙᏗ. - Stay alive, underneath way-point for your
self protection.

## ᏧᏟ ᏩᎦᏂ

ᏧᏟ ᏩᎦᏂ - Fox Fagan

ᏥᏔᎦ ᎨᎵᏍᎩ… ᏥᏔᎦ Ꮃ ᎤᎬᏫᏳ… ᏥᏔᎦ ᏫᎦᏎ… ᏥᏔᎦ… ᏥᏔᎦ… ᏥᏔᎦ… ᏂᎦᎥ ᏗᎬᏂᏍᏙᏗ - Chicken pie…
Chicken “la” king/chief… Chicken Fricasse… Chicken… Chicken… Chicken…
for any of these recipes.

ᏌᏊ ᎠᎦᏴᎵ ᏂᏗᎬᏂᏗ ᎬᏂᏍᏙᏗ ᏥᏔᎦ - One thousand preparation recipes for chicken.

ᎠᏆᎾᏔ ᎭᏢ ᏌᏊ ᏱᏥᏂᏯ… Ꮎ ᏗᎦᎶᎩᏍᎩ ᎤᏬᏗᎨ ᏥᏔᎦ ᎤᎾᏁᏍᏗᎢ - I know where one I might
catch… That Farmer Brown, chickens their-flexible-holding-place.

ᎠᏎᏃ ᏏᎸᏍᏓ, ᏥᏓᎢᏅᏓ Ꮎ ᏄᏓᎾᏛᎾ ᎤᎦᏎᏍᏓ ᎩᏟ\! - But there is a cause to wait a
minute, I must get rid of that none-thinking watch dog\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᎭᏩ ᏃᏛ\! - Alright then\!

ᎣᏏᏲ ᎩᎾᎵ, Ꮭ ᎪᎱᏍᏗ ᏱᎦᎮᎳ, ᏞᎦ ᏗᎦᏙᎳ ᏗᏣᎾᏬ\! - Hello my friend, Not something
that will bother, I need to use your clothes a while\!

ᎯᎠ ᏗᎾᏬ, ᎤᏙᎯᏳ ᎠᏯ ᎤᏠᏯ Ꮎ ᏗᎦᎶᎩᏍᎩ ᎤᏬᏗᎨ. - This clothing, really I same-as
that Farmer Brown.

Ꭾ ᏂᎯ\! - Hey you\!

ᏝᎨ ᏧᏟ ᏘᎨᎯᏙᏱᎩ ᎥᎿ ᏗᏆᏤᎵ ᏥᏔᎦ? - You are watching for foxes there where my
chickens are or not?

Ꭷ, ᎩᎳᎢᏳᏍᏗ ᏥᎪᏩᏔ ᏧᏟ ᎠᏨᏏᏱᏙᎲᎢ ᎾᎥ ᏅᏲ ᎠᏐᏴᎢ… ᏓᏤᏝ ᏃᏊ ᏱᏣᏂᎩᏌ\!\! - Ka, someone
like that I just saw, a fox snooping around near the rock wall… Now it
is better if you really get started\!\!

ᏥᏌᎹᏓ\! ᏍᎩᏛ ᎤᏙᎯᏳ ᏥᏌᎹᏓ\!\! - Smart\! Yeah that’s it, I’m very smart\!

ᎣᏏᏊ ᏒᎯᏰᏯᏗᏜ ᎢᏥᎨ? ᏙᎯᏊ ᏁᏣᏛᏁᏍᏗ… ᎡᎷᏊ ᎠᏋᏌ ᏱᎦᏓᏍᏕᎳᎯᏓ. - It is just a swell
evening ladies? Just peaceful let you all become… I am about to help
myself.

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᎯᎠᎨᏒ ᎣᏍᏓᎨᏒ Ꮎ ᏫᎧᏎ\! - This one is good as that Fricasse\!

ᎯᎠᏃ… Ꭵ Ꭵ… ᎠᏟᎩᏍᎩ ᎡᏙᎯ - And this one… uh uh … sleeper walker.

ᎯᎠᎾᏗᏜ… ᏥᏔᎦ ᎨᎵᏍᎩ - Towards this… chicken pie\!

ᎡᏣᎦᏎᏍᏕᏍᏗ ᎢᏥᎨ\! ᏱᏬᎦᎶᎯᏍ ᏭᎵᏍᏛᎢ - You all will be being careful ladies\!
There is a short drop at the end

Ꭳ, Ꭳ, ᎠᏰᏥᏙᎯ… Ꮎ ᏗᎦᎶᎩᏍᎩ ᎤᏬᏗᎨ ᏳᏛᎦᏅ ᏂᎦᏪᏍᎬᎢ, ᎠᏯᏃ ᎠᎩᎵᏬᏨ ᎧᏬᏄ… ᎾᏕ ᏧᏟ\! - Oh, oh,
waking up walker… That Farmer Brown hears her making a noise, then I am
a dead duck… I meant to say fox\!

ᏓᏂᏥᏃᎨᏎᎵ ᏫᎦᏢᏍᎬ ᎪᎯᏓ - I’ll sing her to being asleep for a long time.

“ᎦᏥᏟᎨᎯᏍᏗᎯ ᎤᏍᏗᎢ” - “Rock-a-Bye Baby”

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᏥᎪᏫᏘ Ꮓ Ꮎ ᏅᏲ ᎠᏐᏴ… I see now that stone fence…

ᎭᏩ ᏧᏟ, ᏃᏊᏍ ᏗᎦᎢ, ᎡᏣᏛᏅ ᎠᎴ ᎡᏣᏁᎦᎸᏗ\!\! - Alright fox, now I’m coming, you
will be hanged and skinned\!\!

ᎠᏲ\! - Ouch\!

ᎾᎯᏳᏃ… And then…

ᏄᏁᎩᎵᏓ ᏂᎦᏛᏁᎭ… ᏧᏟ ᏕᎧᏃᎩᏏᎭ ᏥᏔᎦ\! - Absurdity this… A fox singing for a
chicken\!

“ᎦᏥᏟᎨᎯᏍᏗ ᎤᏍᏗᎢ” - “Rock-a-Bye Baby”

Ꭽ\! ᎯᎠ ᎠᎬᏱ ᏗᏥᏃᎩᏏᎲ ᏥᏔᎦ ᎬᏂᏍᏙᏓ - Ha\! This is first time I ever sang to a
chicken dinner

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᏃᏊᏍ ᎠᏯ… - Now I…

ᏏᎸᏍᏗ ᏌᏊ ᎢᏯᏔᏬᏔᏅᎢ, ᎩᎾᎵ - Wait one minute, my friend

ᏝᏢ ᏱᏥᎪᏫᏔ Ꮎ ᏧᏟ Ꮎ ᏅᏲ ᏣᏐᏯ - I didn’t see that fox at that stone fence of
before

ᏅᏲᎩ ᏣᏐᏯ? …ᏂᎪᏫᏘᎲᎾ ᏧᏟ\! - Stone fence of before? that is (why) without
seeing a fox\!

ᏅᏲ ᎠᏔᎴᏒ ᎠᎹᏱ ᏥᎦᏓ… ᏄᎳ ᏕᎮᎾ, ᏱᎬᎪᏩᏛᏓ\! - Stone hole water-place I said where…
Hurry up and go my way, I’m about to show you\!

ᎪᎱᏍᏗ ᎾᏆᏍᏓ, ᏕᏥᎵᎡᎾ ᎠᎴ ᎾᏆᏓᎾᏛᎾ - Something either of me, I am deaf or I am
without thinking.

Ꮒ\! ᎥᎿᎢ ᏧᏟ\! - ᎠᎩᎢ\! - Look\! Therein is the fox\!

ᎭᏢ? - Where?

ᎠᎭᏂ\! - Here\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᏧᎻ\! - Splash

Ꭷ, ᏥᎯᎱᎸᎦ\! - Ka, he is washed up.

Ꭾ\! ᎢᏥᏅᎪᎯ ᎦᏅᏛᎢ? - Hey\! You all have exited out of the bag?

Ꭾ ᎠᏍᎦᏯ\! - Hey man\!

ᎦᏙᎤᏍᏗᏃ…- And what thing…

ᏧᏟ ᏂᎬᎵᏍᏓᏁᎭ\! - Fox I am happening to you\!

Ꮭ\! ᎠᏯ ᏗᏥᎶᎩᏍᎩ ᎤᏬᏗᎨᎢ - ᏍᎩᎪᎲᏛ\! - No\! I am Farmer Brown - you see me\!

ᏙᏛ, ᎠᏎᏃ Ꮭ ᎴᎯᏳ ᏱᏂᏓᏙᎢ\! - Sure, but not ever having a tail\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

Ꭾ? ᏣᏙᏓᏍ ᎤᏅᏔ ᏣᏅᎪᏨ? - Hey\! Does your father know you are out?

ᎤᏅᏔᏛ\! - He does\!

ᎥᎥ\! - uh uh

ᎥᏍᎩᎾ ᎠᎩᏙᏓ\! - That is my dad\!

ᎬᏅᎨᏒ ᎠᏓᏅᏖ, Ꮭ ᎠᏯ ᎨᏒ Ꮎ ᏗᎦᎶᎩᏍᎩ ᎤᏬᏗᎨᎢ. - Obviously he is thinking, I am not
that Farmer Brown

ᏕᎯᏴᎯᏊ\! ᎬᎦᏘᏴᎢ\! - Come in\! I was expecting you\!

ᎣᏏᏛᏃ ᎥᏍᎩᎾ ᎣᏂᏱᎩ ᎥᎩᏲᏍᏓᏁᎲᎢ, ᎠᏆᏓᎦᏍᎦᏃ . . . ᎠᏎᏃ ᏝᎨᏒ ᏥᏔᎦᎨᏒ\!\! - I hope that
is the last interruption. I am getting fed up, but not with chicken\!

ᎮᎦᏍᏓᎭ ᎢᏥᎨᏳᏣ, Ꮭ ᏯᏩᏢᏓᎾᏁᎭ ᏂᎦᏓ ᎨᏒᎢ, …- I am sorry girls but I don’t have
time for all of you, so …

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

…ᏓᏥᎾᏫᏛ, ᎠᎴ ᏫᏓᏤᏢ ᏩᎾ ᎨᏎᏍᏗ - The biggest I am taking away, and you better
be tender\!

Ꭳ, Ꭳ, ᎯᎠ ᎨᏒ ᎠᏛᏅᏍᏗ ᎤᏝᏫᏗᏍᏗᎢ - Oh oh - this one is ready to take off

ᎦᏍ\! ᏙᏳ ᎦᎸᎳᏗ ᎦᏃᎯᎵᏙᎯ - Gosh\! Truly an up high flyer.

ᎢᎢᎢᎢᏲᏫᎢᎢ - Eeeeeyyoow

ᏧᎻ\! - Splash\!

ᎧᏩᎧ\! - Kawack\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᎠᏎᏛᎲ, Ꮭ ᎦᏥᏂᏯ ᏧᏟ. - I guess I won’t catch a fox.

ᎠᏲ\! - Ouch\!

Ꭳ, ᏂᎭᏕᏃᎴ… ᏝᎨ Ꮟ ᎯᏂᏴᏛᏱᎩ Ꮎ ᏧᏟ? - Oh\! it is you again - You catch that fox
yet or not?

ᎠᏎᏛᎲ Ꮭ ᎣᏍᏓ ᏗᏥᎴᎾᎯᏓᏱᎩ ᎠᏯ ᏱᎩ - I guess I was not cut out to be a fox hound

Ꭷ, ᏏᎸᏍᏗ ᏌᏊ ᎢᏳᏩᎦᏓ ᏛᎬᎵᏍᎪᎵᏓᏁᎵ - Ka, yet a moment, I am going to give you
one more chance\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᎯᎪᏫᏘᎭᏍ Ꮎ ᎦᏚ ᎧᎵᏦᏛ ᏧᎩᎳ ᏥᏔᎩ, ᎯᏯᎦ ᎯᎠ ᎦᏂᏙᏗ, ᎠᎴ ᎬᏂᎨᏒ ᏱᏂᏥᏴᎦ Ꮎ ᏧᏟ. - Do you see
that chicken up there on the roof, put it in this bag, and in view I
will make the fox\!

Ꮵ, ᏩᏙ\! - Gee, thanks\!

ᎠᎯᏓ ᎯᎢᎾ, ᎾᏊ ᏥᏌᎹᏓ ᎩᏟ - This is easy, now I am a smart dog

ᎬᏂᏯ\! - I got you\!

ᎠᎧ\! - Awk

ᎯᏂᏯᏍ, ᎭᏗ? - You got it, you just said?

ᎤᏙᏳᏛ\! - Most truly\!

Ꭷ, ᎭᏩ\! ᏘᏲᎯᏗᎾ\! - Ka, alright\! You will give it\!

ᎠᎭᏂ ᏓᏳᏍᏗᏓ\! - Here it comes\!

ᏞᏂᎧ\! - Clank\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

Ꭽ\! ᏙᏳ ᏭᎨᏗᏴ ᎡᎶ ᎡᎯ ᏥᏔᎦ\! - Hah\! Truly most heavy chicken in the world\!

ᎭᏓᎾᏘᏓ… ᏣᏛᏍᏔᏅ ᏍᎩᎪᏩᏛᏗ Ꮎ ᏧᏟ - Remember… You promised me for you to show me
the fox

ᎠᎭᏂ ᏣᎵᎶᏥᏓ\!\! - Here you lacking one\!

ᎠᏊᏌ ᎦᏓᎵᏍᏓᏅᎢ\! - Myself doggoned\!

ᏧᏟ\! ᏥᏂᎭᏛᎦ\!\! Ꭾ\! Ꭾ\! - Fox\! Again you did it\!\! Heh\! Heh\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᏛᎻ\! ᏛᎻ\! ᏏᎸᏍᏗ… ᎦᏣᎸᏅ… ᎦᏚᏅ… ᎠᎵᏓᏅᎢ ᎥᏍᎩ… ᎠᎵᏓᏅᎢ\! - Tum\! Tum\! Just a
minute… Fried… Roasted… Boiled… Boiled\!

ᏏᎸᏍᏓ ᎠᎬᏱ ᎦᏲᏟ ᏗᏓᎵᏥᏍᏗᏍᎩ ᏃᎴ ᎦᏲᏟ ᏆᏍᎵ… - Just a minute first a small amount
of carrots then a small amount of parsley…

ᏃᏊᏛᎨᏒ - Ꮎ ᏥᏍᏆ\!\! - Truly now being - The bird\!

ᎠᎧ\! - Awk\!

ᏙᏳ ᎤᏄᏗᏱ, ᎠᏎᏃ… ᏥᏔᎦ\!\! - Very tough, but… it is chicken\!

ᎠᎵᏍᏆᏓ - End

## ᎤᏍᏗ ᎦᎵᎩᎾ

ᎤᏍᏗ ᎦᎵᎩᎾ - Little Buck

ᎠᏙᎯᏍᏗ ᎦᏛᎩᏍᎦ\! - His yell I hear\!

ᏙᏳ ᎤᎵᎮᎵᏍᏓ, ᏙᎨᎤᏍᏗ ᏂᎦᎵᏍᏗᎭ? - He sure is excited, wonder what is up?

Ꭷ\! ᎦᏙᎦᎵᏍᏗᎭ, ᎤᏍᏗ ᎦᎵᎩᎾ? - Gosh\! What is wrong buck?

ᏈᏂᏙ\! ᎢᏂᏃᎭᎴᎦ\! Pinto\! We are going hunting\!

ᎠᏎᏃ Ꮭ ᏣᏓᎾᏖ ᎢᏳᏍᏗ\! - But not the way you think\!

ᏝᏃ ᎦᎵᏣᏗ ᎠᎴ ᏗᎦᏟᏓ ᏃᎴ ᏅᏱ ᎤᏕᎩ ᏃᎴ ᎦᎶᏪ, ᎪᎯᏊ ᏄᏍᏗᏓᏅᎢ. - No more bow and arrows
or slingshots or rifles, we are going modern\!

ᎠᏓᏟᎶᏍᏗᏍᎩ ᏓᏅᎾᏛᏂ\! - We are using a camera\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᏙᏳᏛ ᎠᏓᏟᎶᏍᏗᏍᎩ ᎤᎪᏓ ᎠᎯᏓ ᎥᎿ ᎢᎾᎨ ᎠᏁᎯ ᎠᏎᏃ ᎨᏒ ᎦᏟᏓ ᎠᎴ ᏗᎦᏟᏓ\! - You have got to
admit a camera is a lot easier on animals than a bow and arrow\!

ᏂᏯ ᏥᎦᏗ… ᎠᏂᎸᏉᏗᎭ\! - See what I mean… They love it\!

ᏟᎧ\! - Click\!

ᏃᏊ… ᏣᏰᏣ\! - Now… Smile\!

ᏃᏊᏍ ᏄᏓᎴ ᏄᏍᏗᏓᎾ, ᏈᏂᏙ… ᎢᎾᎨ ᎠᏁᎯ ᏃᏊ ᏗᎨᎩᏂᎸᏉᏓ\! - Things are different now,
Pinto… The animals all love us\!

ᎠᏎᏃ ᎯᎠ ᎠᎯᏗᏊ… ᎤᎪᏓ ᏧᎵᏤᎩ ᏗᎩᏂᏟᎶᏍᏓ\! - But this stuff is too tame… What we
need are some unusual shots\!

Ꮒ\! ᏧᏙᏓᎸᎢ… ᎠᏬᎭᎵ ᎤᏩᏁᏍᎬᎲᎢ - Look\! up there on the cliff … An eagle’s
nest\!

Ꮒ , ᏄᎵᏍᏗᏓ ᎤᏂᏥ ᎠᏬᎭᎵ - And there goes the mother eagle.

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᏄᎳ ᏈᏂᏙ\! ᎦᏚ ᏫᏓᏂᎸᏍᏓᏂ, ᏗᏟᎶᏍᏙᏗ ᎾᎥᏂᎨᏍᏗ ᎠᏬᎭᎵ ᏧᏪᏥ. - Come on Pinto\! we are
going to the top for some eagle-egg close-ups\!

ᏙᏳᎧ… ᏂᏚᏬᏚᎯ\! ᎤᏟᏍᏓᏍ ᏗᎩᎶᏫᏍᏓᏏ, ᏏᎸᏍᏓ ᏄᎷᏨᎾ ᎤᏂᏥ ᎠᏬᎭᎵ. - Boy o’ boy… What
beauties\! We gotta work fast before mother eagle gets back

ᏏᎸᏍᏓ ᎠᎬᏱ ᏗᏂᎧᏁᎦ ᏍᏕᏱᏛ ᎥᎿ ᎯᏂᏓᏛᎢ… ᏐᎢᏃ ᎦᎸᏪᏍᏙᏗ ᎠᏩᏓᏠᏍᏗᎢ - First, we tie this
rope to your tail… and the other end around my waist

Ꮓ, ᏙᎢ ᎡᎳᏗᏜ - Then I let myself down easy

ᏞᏍᏗ ᏨᏨᎨᏫᏏ… ‘ᎭᏏᏄᎦ’ ᎠᏰᎸᏓ Ꮎ ‘ᎡᎳᏗᏜ’… ᎠᎴ ‘ᎭᏂᎩ’ Ꮎ ᎠᏰᎸᏓ ‘ᎠᏌᎵᏙᏗ’\! - Now
remember… “Back up” means “down”… and “giddap” means “up”\!

‘ᎭᏏᏄᎦ’ Ꮎ ᎠᏰᎸᏓ ‘ᎠᏌᎵᏙᏗ’… Ꮟ, ᎾᏕ ‘ᎡᎳᏗᏜ’ Ꮎ ᎠᏰᎸᏓ ‘ᎭᏂᎦ’ Ꮭ… ᎠᏌᎵᏙᏗ… ᎡᎳ… - Back up
means up… I mean down and down means giddap… no… up… dow…

ᎭᏩ… ᎭᏏᏄᎦ\! ᎯᏒᎵᏚᎦ, ᎯᏒᎵᏛᎦ\! ᏏᎸᏍᏗ ᏍᏗᏊ\! - Ok… Back up\! Up up\! A little
more\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᎭᎴᏫᏍᏓ\! ᏙᏳᎧ\! ᏗᏟᎶᏍᏙᏗ… ᎡᎵᏍᏗ ᎪᎱᏍᏗ ᏱᎦᏓᏌᎾ\! - Whoa\! Boy o’ boy\! What a
shot… I should win something with this\!

ᎪᎱᏍᏗ ᏛᎩᏲᏎᎵ ᎾᏆᎵᏍᏓᏁᎭ ᎯᎠ\! - Feels as if I am going to lose something with
this\!

ᏥᏥᏥᏥᏥᏥᏥ - zzzzzzz

Ꭳ… Ꭳ\! ᎠᏛᏩᎦᏘᎯᏙᎯ - Oh… Oh\! A visitor

ᎭᏛᏓᏍᏓ\! ᏝᎨ ᏱᏍᎩᎪᏫᏘ ᏓᎩᎶᏫᏍᏓᏁᎲᎢ? ᎭᏂᎩ\!\! - Listen\! Can not you see I am
busy? Scram\!\!

ᎭᏩ… ᏨᏌᏊ\!\! - All right… You asked for it\!

ᏩᎧ\! - Whack\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

Ꭴ\! - Ooph\!

Ꭾ, Ꮭ ᏱᎦᏛᏛᎦ ᏣᏛᏅ, ‘ᎭᏂᎩ\!’ - Hey\! I didn’t hear you say giddap\!

Ꮭ ᏱᏂᏥᏫ\!\! - I did not say it\!\!

ᏃᏊᏛ… ᎦᏛᏅᏖᎳ\! ᏞᏍᏗ ᏨᎠᏖᎸᎾ, ᎬᏂᎩᎳ, ‘ᎭᏂᎩ’ ᏯᏆᏛᎾ\! - Now… remember do not move a
muscle unless I say giddap\!

ᎡᎷᏊᏍ Ꮭ ᎪᎱᏍᏗ ᏱᎦᎩᎲᎾ… ᏝᏍᏊ ᎦᏙ ᏳᏖᎸᎾ\! - Betcha nothing could move me… not
even an earthquake\!

ᎭᏩ… ᎭᎦᏙᏍᏓ ᏥᏍᏆ… - okay… Now watch the bird…

ᎦᏙᎤᏍᏗ ᏥᏍᏆ? - What bird?

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

Ꭷ\! Ꮎ ᏧᏪᏥ ᎠᎾᎴᏂ ᏓᏂᏯᎢᏍᎬᎢ\! - Ka\! The eggs are starting to hatch\!

ᎡᏥ\!\! - Mother\!\!

Ꮭ ᎬᏥ ᏱᎩ - I am not your mother

ᎠᏎᏃ\! ᏃᏛ ᏓᏳᏍᏗᏓ\! - But\! Here she comes now\!

ᏍᎩᏕᎳ\! ᏈᏂᏙ\!\! ᏍᎩᏌᎸᏛᎦ — ᏄᎳ\! - Help\! Pinto\!\! Pull me up — Hurry\!

ᏍᎩᏕᎳ\! - Help\!

ᎠᏲ\! - Ouch\!

ᏍᎩᏌᎳᏛᎦ\! - Pull me up\!

ᏄᎳ\! - Hurry\!

ᎠᏲ\! - Ouch\!

ᏄᎾᏍᏛ ᏂᎦᏓ ᏄᎾᏓᏅᏛᎾ ᏗᎦᎾᏢᏓ\! - Of all the dumb animals\!

ᎦᏙᎲ ᏂᎦᏌᎸᏛᏅᎾ? - Why did not you pull me up?

Ꮭ ‘ᎭᏂᎩ’ ᏱᏍᏉᏏ\! - You did not say giddap\!

Ꭷ, - ᏙᏳᏛᏃ, ‘ᎭᏂᎩ’\! - Ka,- you better start giddapin’ rite now\!

ᎦᏙᏃ ᏂᎦᏛᎦ? - Now what did I do?

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

Ꭾ\! ᏏᎸᏍᏓ ᏞᎦ ᎯᎦᏘᏯ ᎦᎵᎩᏂ ᎦᏙᎤᏍᏗ Ꮎ ᎾᎥ ᏧᏍᏓᎪᎸᎢ? - Hey\! Wait a minute buck what
is that over there by the cave?

ᏈᏂᏙ\! ᎠᏂᏓ ᏢᏓᏥ - Pinto\! It’s a mountain lion cub

Ꭷ\! ᎤᏙᎯᏳᎭ ᏗᏟᎶᏍᏓᏅ ᎯᎠ ᎨᏎᏍᏗ\! - Ka\! What a picture that will make\!

ᏣᏅᎨᏍᏗ\! ᎤᏙᎯᏳ ᎩᏂᏍᎪᎵᏓᏁᎭ\! ᎭᏓᎾᏖᎳ\! “ᎤᏍᏗ ᎦᎵᎩᎾ” ᎡᎶᎯ ᏗᎦᏃᏣᎵ ᏗᎦᎾᏢᏗ ᏗᏟᎶᏍᏗᏍᎩ. -
Hurry up\! This is our big chance\! Imagine it\! “Little Buck” World
famous animal photographer.

ᎾᎥ ᏫᎩᏂᎷᏣ ᏱᏂᏩᏛᏓ\! - When we get close we will sneak up on him\!

ᏁᏙᎲᎾ\! - Gone\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

Ꮒ\! ᏧᎳᏏᏅ ᏚᏙᎮᎳ ᏧᏍᏓᎪᎸᏗᏜ - Look\! His tracks lead into the cave

ᎭᏛᏓᏍᏓ\! Ꮟ ᏌᏊᎢᏳᏩᎦᏓ ᏛᎬᎵᏍᎪᎵᏓᏁᎵ\!\! - Now listen\! I am going to give you
one more chance\!\!

ᎠᎬᏱ, ᏓᏥᎧᏂ ᎯᎠ ᏗᏓᏟᎶᏍᏗᏍᎩ – ᏂᎭᏃ, ᎯᎠ ᏥᏄᏍᏗ ᏣᏐᏅᏙᏗ ᎨᏎᏍᏗ - First, I will prop
this camera up – then all you have to do is push the little gadget

ᎠᏎᎾ ᎮᏍᏗ ᏨᎭᏒᏂᎳ ᎬᏂᎩᎳ Ꮎ ᎠᏂᏓ ᏢᏓᏥ ᏥᏅᎪᏍᏓᏅᎢ - Ꮓ ᎭᎴᎾ ᏕᎭᏟᎶᏍᏗᎲᎢ – ᏞᏍᏗ ᏨᎭᎴᏫᏍᏓᏂ -
But do not touch it until I chase the little cub out - then start
snapping – and do not stop\!\!

ᎮᏍᏗ ᏯᏓᎾᏖᎸᏍᎨᏍᏗ ᎦᎵᎩᎾ\! Ꮭ ᎡᏍᎦ ᏱᏂᏗᎬᏛᏁᏎᎳ ᎯᎠ. - Don’t worry buck\! I won’t let
you down this time.

ᏕᎮᎾ - ᏪᏌ - ᏪᏌ\! ᏘᏅᎪᎢ ᎠᎴ ᏕᏣᏟᎶᏍᏓ\! - Here - Cat - Cat\! Come out and get
your picture took\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᏗᎭᎳᏓ ᏂᎦᏩ\! - Roar\!

ᎦᎵᎩᎾ ᎡᎵᏍᏓ ᎦᏂᏯ\! - Sounds as if Buck’s got him\!

ᎣᏍᏓ ᏕᎭᏟᎶᏍᏓ– ᎦᎵᎩᎾ\! - Swell shot– Buck\!

Ꮟ\! - Hold it\!

ᏍᎩᏍᏕᎳ\! - Help\!

ᏣᏰᏣ\! - Smile\!

Ꭾ ᎦᎵᎩᎾ\! ᎡᎷᏊᏍ ᎮᎵᎠ ᏂᎦᎢ? - Hey Buck\! Don’t you think that is enough?

ᎧᎪ–ᎠᏯᏍ, ᏂᎯᎨ\! - Who– me or you?

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᏩᎧ\! - Whack\!

ᎣᏍᏓ\! ᎦᎵᎩᎾ, ᎠᏎᏍᏊ ᏕᎦᏟᎶᏍᏓ ᏍᏊ - Great\! Buck, I got that one too

Ꮭ ᏱᎪᎵᎦ ᎦᏙᏃ ᎦᎵᎩᎾ ᎥᏍᎩᎾ ᏧᎵᏍᏈᏍᏗ ᏗᏟᎶᏍᏓᏅᎢ - I just can’t understand why Buck
wanted to get into all those pictures

Ᏻ-Ꮁ- ᎦᎵᎩᎾ\! ᎭᏢ ᎮᏙᎭ? - Yoo - Hoo - Buck\! Where are you?

ᎠᎭᏂ, ᏈᏂᏙ-\! - Right here, Pinto-\!

ᎦᎵᎩᎾ, ᎣᏍᏓ ᎾᏛᎦ- ᏂᎦᏓ ᏥᎩᏐᎭᏂ\! - Buck, you are a success- I got everything\!

ᎥᏍᎨ ᎮᎵᏍᎦ\! - That’s what you think\!

ᏛᎮᎾ, ᏈᏂᏙ, ᏗᏂᎬᏟᎶᏍᏓᎾᏊ\! - Come here again, Pinto\!\! I am just going to
take your picture\!

Ꮭ, ᎡᎷᏊ\! Ꮭ ᎣᏏᏊ ᏱᏗᏍᎩᏟᎶᏍᏓ ᎢᎦᎥ ᏱᏓᏬᏘᏌ. - No, enough\! I do not photograph
very well with lumps\!

## ᏈᏘ ᎠᎴ ᏔᏫᏘ

ᏈᏘ ᎠᎴ ᏔᏫᏘ - Pete and Tweet

ᎠᎩᏙᎦᏏ ᎠᎩᏰᏍᏗᎢ- ᎤᏖᏓ ᎦᎵᏍᎩᏍᎬᎢ\! - Ho Hum – I sure hate to wake up- What a
swell dream\!

ᏈᏘ ᏗᏥᎧᏁᎲᎢ, ᏧᏬᏰᎾ ᎠᎴ ᏚᎳᏏᏛᎢ … - I had Pete tied hand and foot–

ᎾᏆᏛᏅᏒᎢ- ᎦᏙᎲᏃ\! ᏃᎴ ᏥᏍᏆ ᎤᏂᎩᏍᏓ ᏌᎾᎴ ᎠᎩᏍᏗ\! - And just as I was- And phooey\!
Bird seed again for morning food\!

Ꮎ ᎾᎩᎸᏆᏛᎾ ᎠᎩᏗ ᎾᎪᎯᎸ ᎤᎪᏓ ᎡᎳᏗᎯᏯ ᎾᏭᏁ ᎠᏎᏃ ᎠᏍᎪᏯ. - Eating that junk day after
day has got me feeling lower than a worm.

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᎥᏍᎩᎾ\! ᏍᎪᏯ\!\! Ꮎ ᎠᏂᏥᏍᏆ ᏱᏓᏂᏰᎠ, ᎠᏯᏃᏱᎩ? - That’s it\! A worm\!\! If other
bird clan eat them, why not I?

ᎠᏎᏃ ᎠᎬᏱ- ᏥᎶᏎᏍᏗ Ꮎ ᏈᏘ\! ᎣᏏᏃ Ꮟ ᏥᎦᏟᎭ. - But first- I have got to get by
Pete\! Thank goodness he is asleep\!

ᎪᎯᏓ ᎠᎦᏝᏫᏛᎲᎢ, ᏗᎦᏎᏍᏓᎾ\! - I have not flown for so long, I better take the
safe way down\!

ᎣᏏ ᎨᏎᏍᏗ ᏛᏥᎷᏒᎢ- ᏏᎸᏍᏓ ᎪᎱᏍᏗ ᏱᏄᎵᏍᏓᏂ. - I only hope it will be a safe way up-
Just in case.

Ꮭ ᎴᎯᏳ ᏈᏘ ᎠᎩᏂᏴᏓ ᏱᎩ, ᎠᏎᏃ ᎠᎬᏱ ᏂᎦᎵᏍᏓᏂᏙᎰᎢ. - Pete has never caught me yet,
but there’s always a first time\!

ᏙᏳ Ꮭ ᏯᎵᏍᎪᏂᏍᎦ-ᏔᏫᏘ\! - And you are not kidding-Tweet\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᏞᎦ ᎤᏬᎵᏓ ᏩᏰᎸᎾ ᏏᎸᏍᏓ ᏱᏥᏱᏅᏓ\! - I will let him have a little fun before I
nab him\!

ᏃᏊ ᏍᎪᏯ ᏙᏳᎢ, ᎦᏳᎳ ᏥᎩᎠ— ᎠᎩ ᏌᏊ\! - Now for a worm Boy\! I can taste him now—
There is one\!

ᏥᏍᏆ\! - Bird\!

ᏛᎮᎾ\! ᎩᎾᎵ– ᎬᏯᏒᏰᏍᏓᏅᎢ ᎥᎿ ᏌᎪᏂᎨ ᎠᏖᎵᏙᎯ\!\! - Come back here\! My friend– I
have got a place for you on a blue plate special\!\!

ᏕᎭᏓᏅᏗᏍᏓᏂᏙᎲ Ꮎ ᏡᎬᎢ Ꮭ ᏗᏣᏓᏍᏕᎸ ᏣᏂᏱᏍᎬ ᏫᏓᏤᏢ ᏍᎪᏱ ᏗᎦᏂᏱᏍᎩ ᎡᎶᎯ ᎡᎯ. - Ducking around
a tree is not going to save you from the best worm catcher in the world.

ᎠᎭ\! ᎬᏂᏯ\! - Aha\! Got you\!

ᏄᎳ\! ᎮᏍᏗ ᏯᏕᎵᎰᏍᎨᏍᏗ ᏂᎯ ᎠᎴ ᎠᏯ Ꮲ ᎢᏁᎦ\! - Hurry up\! Don’t be shy, you and I
are going somewhere\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

Ꭽ, Ꮒ\!\! - Ha, Look\!\!

Ꭳ… ‘ᏏᏲ\! - Oh… Hello\!

ᎠᎴ ᎦᏂᎩᎠ\! - And goodby\!

ᎬᎾᎨ ᏲᎾ ᎢᎾᎨᎢ\! ᎠᏴ ᏥᎯᎷᎩ\! - Black bears in the woods\! I’m coming\!

ᎠᎭᏂ ᎠᏆᏗᏍᎦᏞᏍᏗ, ᎠᏂᎩᏍᎬ ᏱᎪᎯᏓ- ᏙᏳᎧ ᎨᎭ\!- ᏍᎪᏯ ᏥᎨ ᎠᎴ ᏈᏘ ᎠᎩᎨ- ᏃᎴ Ꮎ ᏍᎪᏯ ᎩᎶ ᎠᎨ\! -
I will duck in this can till he goes, what a life\!- Me after a worm and
Pete after me- and the worm after somebody else\!

ᎠᏎᏃ Ꮭ ᏫᎦᏥᎷᎩ ᏍᎪᏯ ᏥᏘᏁᎲᎾ\! - But I can not go back without a worm\!

ᎠᎴᏃ ᎠᎭᏂ ᏪᏊ ᎡᎯ ᎥᎿ ᎡᎶᎯ\! - And here is the biggest one in the whole
world\!

ᎬᏂᏯ ᏃᏊᏛ ᎠᎬᏱ ᏍᎪᏯ - Caught you, Now the first worm

ᎯᎠᏃ ᏥᏚᎢᏒ ᎠᎹ- ᏃᏊᏛ- ᏱᎬᏍᏕᎳ ᎠᎩᎯᏍᏗᎢ\! - And this I turn the water on - Truly
now- I will help you wash it down\!

### (ᏐᎢ ᎪᏪᎵ)

ᎦᎵᏦᎯᏓ ᎤᎵᏍᏓᏁᎭ\! - He is sure fattening up\!

ᎪᎱᏍᏗ ᎦᏕᎶᎣᏍᎬᎢ - Ꮒ ᏪᏌ\! - I was noticing something - you cat\!

ᏕᎮᎾ\! ᏂᎯ ᎤᎩᏓᎵ ᎠᎹ ᎠᏟᏍᏛ\! - Come towards me\! You feathered water bottle\!

ᎦᏎᎦᏍᏙᏓ Ꮎ ᏪᏌ ᏄᏂᎸᏉᏓ ᎠᎹ— ᏥᎬᏍᏙᏓ ᏗᏓᏩᎵᏔᏚᎦ - Lucky for me cats hate water — He
sure got a mouthful when he jumped on me

ᏍᎩᏕᎳ\! ᏥᎬᎦ - Help\! I am drowning

ᎾᎪᎯᎸᏃ, ᏥᏚᏍᎨᏍᏗ ᎠᎩᎩᏍᏗ ᏂᎦᏓ ᏥᏍᏊ ᎤᏂᎩᏍᏗ ᎠᎴ ᎠᏆᏓᎾᏓ ᎨᏎᏍᏗ ᏥᏥᏍᏆ- ᎤᏙᎯᏳᎢ\!\! - And
from now on I promise to eat all my bird seed and be a good bird- so
truly\!\!

