+++
draft = false
date = 2022-06-27T01:21:43Z
title = "Bound Pronouns App"
weight = 1656292900

[taxonomies]
authors = ["Michael Conrad"]
categories = ["Apps", "Grammar"]
tags = ["Bound Pronouns", "Flash Cards", "Android", "iOS", "Linux", "MacOS", "Windows"]

[extra]
featured_image = "../static/images/bound-pronouns.png"

+++

#### (App updated 2022-07-18)

Learn the bound pronouns of Cherokee.

This is a custom flashcard program to help with learning the bound pronouns of the Cherokee Language.

Includes neural network TTS speech generated by IMS-Toucan and Amazon for each of the conjugated challenges to help with learning pitch and cadence. 

Headphones are strongly recommended.

<!-- more -->

For a real learning experience, try the audio only mode using only the conjugated forms with headphones on!

Displays either Syllabary, Latin, or both with or without pronunciation markings.

Practice sets include both "bare" and "conjugated" forms.

Tracks progress and shows the cards that you actually need studying each day.

Unlike many other flashcard programs, it isn't designed to be dogmatic about timings. It has a "jump a day forwards" option, where you can jump forwards in the scheduling as if a day had already passed, and, the timings are set to have a maximum "jump" of one day if you miss a day so that the software doesn't try and feed you the entire deck in a single session ...

Additionally, it only feeds you new cards if you successfully complete all current pending cards within the minimum session time (5 minutes) so that you only get new stuff after you perform decently with existing stuff (from day to day).

IF YOU FIND AN ISSUE WITH THE APP OR TRAINING DATA - PLEASE REPORT IT WITH DETAILS AT THE SUPPORT URL: [https://github.com/CherokeeLanguage/BoundPronouns/issues](https://github.com/CherokeeLanguage/BoundPronouns/issues)

### App Stores

* [Android App via Google Play](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.cherokeelessons.bp.android)
* [iPhone/iPad App via Apple](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/cherokee-bound-pronouns/id966667496?ls=1)
* [Android App via Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00TCP955U)

### Direct Download

* [Desktop App via Direct Download](BoundPronouns-3.41.jar)
* [Android App via Direct Download](BoundPronouns-3.41-release.apk)

## Changelog

### 3.41

Slower speech to better match normal Cherokee speech rate.

### 3.40

Much improved IMS-Toucan replacement audio. Fixed two card sets with incorrect conjugations.

### 3.36

Tacotron2 replacement audio. No longer using espeak-ng.
Update pronunciations to be displayed in Modified Community Orthography as used by Uchihara, etc.

### 3.35

Conjugation fixes.

### 3.34

Misc adjustments to deck.

### 3.33

Misc adjustments to deck.

### 3.32

Leaner and better focused deck with more core verbs.
Misc conjugated form fixes. Misc English fixes.

### 3.31

Adjust sort order of master deck to better spread challenges across pronoun and verb combinations.

### 3.30

Fix issue with "bound pronouns" list screen caused by "csv" to "tsv" filename extension change.

### 3.29

Change minimum Android SDK requirements.

### 3.28

Change "csv" to "tsv" to correctly identify file contents for editing.

### 3.27

Add missing audio files.
Use "alveolar" version of "d" instead of "dental" version of "d" for espeak-ng generated audio.

### 3.26

Fixes for the h/ɂ alternations in stems based on persons.

### 3.25

Reduce cards needed for ᎢᏨ-, ᎢᏍᎩ-, ᎢᏍᏛ-, and ᏍᎩᏂ- by doing "a or b" forms in the English.
Also updated English wording replacement to hopefully produce better English answer sets.

### 3.24

Fix for loading embedded master deck on android.

### 3.23

Switch to using pre-conjugated master deck. Boost volume on audio files to max.

### 3.22

Switch to Brazilian Portuguese &~ instead of French V~ for "v" and "ṿ".
Some adjustments for when to use become acquainted instead of recognize.

### 3.21

Update espeak.txt file.

### 3.20

Master deck sort order fix.

### 3.19

Pronunciation fix for prefix ᎦᏥ- (I+them-animate).
The master entry in the pronouns table was missing a tone mark.

### 3.18

Adjust master deck sorting so that challenges are no longer grouped by bound pronoun or verb.
Each new challenge introduced and added to your active cards should now be a different bound pronoun.

Does not change the ordering of cards already active in a session slot which are solely ordered based on
your accuracy with correct answers and last show time.

### 3.17

Indicate how many total cards are in the deck.

Updated to newest espeak-ng output using most recently updated Cherokee phoneme definitions.

### 3.06

Updated to newer espeak-ng output using updated phonemes. (Improvements one can hopefully hear made to 'a', 'e', and 'i').

### 3.05

Updated to newer espeak-ng output using updated phonemes. (Improvements one can hopefully hear made to 'h', 'g', 'd', 's', and 'v').

Final nasal vowels at the end of words still need adjustment.

Short vowels which should be devoiced when followed by "h" aren't at this time.

### 3.04

Updated list of audio files in app so that it can see the 11 added files.

#### 3.03

Added additional display options for "No Marks" to hide all tone and cadence marks to provide plain Syllabary and Latin forms.

Added additional display option for "Audio Only" for those not wanting visual clues for the answers.

Added 11 missing audio challenges. Updated to newer espeak-ng output using updated phonemes.

#### 3.02

Updated audio with latest espeak-ng generated output using updated phoneme files.

#### 3.01

Initial version with synthetic voice audio for each of the challenges. Mute will disable the voice auto play.

#### 2.32

Update to latest available libGDX and MobiVM's RoboVM.
Removed Sync due to labor involved with tracking API changes for OAUTH and WEBVIEWS.
